In this lesson, will install a free cadence theme at your flywheel demo site and two other plug ins,
you'll get the cadence blocks plug in and the starter templates plug in and explore what the templates
look like.
By the end of this video, you'll understand why the blocks plug in offers much more than the standard
WordPress blocks and how turning off the blocks individually can keep your sites fast.
Loading for visitors.
OK, so of course, the first thing you'll notice is that we're running the 2022 theme, as we showed
in the last lesson.
So let's go ahead and go into appearance themes, and we'll get and activate the free cadence theme
now its cadence with a K, so click themes and if we click add new appear.
Generally, cadence is you don't even have to search for it.
It's in the first few themes and the most popular themes in WordPress for good reason.
So a click install right here only take a couple of seconds.
And then before we click Activate, just take a look over here.
We've been working with 2022 and then the Frost full site editing theme.
Now we're looking at ender themes.
You know, it's got the editor with that little red beat up hill right there when we activate a non
full site editing theme or what you might call a non block based theme, which most themes in the WordPress
ecosystems a system are right now you're going to see the kind of the old interface come out, which
is very appropriate and much more popular.
Now two things you'll notice when you click Activate on the cadence theme is that under themes now we
have, you know, the customize and widgets and menus menu items come up under appearance.
And those might seem more familiar, of course, than the new site editor starting in WordPress five
point nine.
But, you know, we have many, many more themes operating in this customizer environment than we do
at this point with block based full site editing themes.
Now that's going to change slowly, and there's good reason for it because block based themes allow
you to do a lot of editing of things that used to take some code or special, you know, functions within
the child theme that you might create.
And really, that's slowly going away.
But cadence and other themes like it compensate for the the, you know, the the lack of customization
by adding their own functionality to it.
And we're going to get into all those details with the cadence theme right now in this whole section
of the course.
So the next thing you'll notice is that immediately you're offered up to install the cadence starter
templates plug in, which I am going to have us do.
And you should do, you know, because it just makes it easier.
It makes it so easy to get started and even to learn cadence.
What we're going to be doing is installing the starter templates, plug in and activating it, and it's
activated too.
And you'll see that if you click that button right there, it immediately opens the Starter Templates
Settings section, which is linked here under appearance and under the cadence menu item.
And you can see right away that you have a large selection of starter templates in their screenshots
here show you that they're all in, you know, different types of industries labeled a little bit and
really like anything else.
And like with block patterns that we were using before, they're really they really can be used for
any type of website.
They all have their own look and feel different typography and different color schemes available to
them.
And not only do we have all of these starter templates freely available to us, but they we also have
a lot more blocks and a lot more block patterns available within the cadence ecosystem.
Now, block patterns are a little bit different.
They're not exactly called block patterns, but it's called the design library within the cadence ecosystem.
And so before we go ahead and download and install any of these starter templates, go ahead and take
a look under plug ins, installed plug ins and you can just see that, of course, in our flywheel installation,
the cadence and started templates is the only plug in that we have activated yet, and I wouldn't want
you to go ahead and click Add New and then search for the word cadence and what you'll see.
The first one that'll come up is the Gutenberg Blocks by Cadence Blocks Page Builder feature.
Years is the title of this plug in, and you should always pair this block's plug in with the cadence
theme because it pairs with it perfectly, it adds a ton of functionality and different blocks.
In addition to all the default WordPress blocks in the block based in the block editor and the The Gutenberg
editor.
This blocks plug in is one of the best.
Now it can also work with other themes.
It's not required that you use the cadence theme with it, but they really pair well together.
So click Install now and then.
Once that is installed on the server, you can click activate and then it brings you to a cadence blocks
welcome screen, which is really the Settings panel.
And if you look, this is where we are under settings and then down here.
Cadence blocks and you can see that there's an assortment of blocks that are available and activated
within the cadence ecosystem here.
So as far as the cadence blocks plug in, you can see there's a number of different plug ins that give
you a lot deeper functionality than the default WordPress blocks currently in WordPress.
And as you go down to the bottom, you can see that there's what how many come with it?
12 different block types that are included in the cadence blocks plug in a couple of things to note.
Look right here.
There's the second one in the list is a form, the contact form or marketing form block.
And so inside of cadence box, there's actually a very functional forms plug in that's actually a block
within the environment.
And it's part of the cadence blocks plug in, which means you don't have to install a separate forms
plug in unless you need some extra functionality that this doesn't include.
This forms plug in is great, and it does have really all the functionality you need for both a contact
form plug in and you can use it as a marketing and email opt in form as well.
It does have some limitations which will go over later in this section, but I also want you to notice
that you know there's some repeated functionality like gallery buttons headings down here, but each
of these is called Advanced Advanced Gallery, Advanced Button and Advanced Heading.
And these give you a whole lot more functionality and customizability on top of what WordPress Core
offers in their gallery, block buttons block and heading block.
And so that's something that we'll be checking out here.
And then the final thing I want to show you in the cadence blocks plug in Settings screen is that each
one of these block types can be deactivated.
Now, cadence theme is known as one of the highest performance and fastest themes on the front end.
We'll do a little bit of testing later in the course when we're talking about speed and performance,
and cadence is one of the fastest loading themes out there for the front end.
So a user will get a really high page score in Google Page Speed Insights, as well as metrics and other,
you know, testing areas that let you test the loading speed of your websites.
And so there's no extraneous code in cadence.
It's all native code, and there's not a lot of, you know, short codes or code bloat that you might
say.
It comes with some of the page builders in the WordPress environment.
And then in addition, there's all these deactivate buttons.
So for example, if you're not using, say, any tabs, if you're not using the tabs block, then you
can deactivate that block from your entire WordPress installation.
And then you'll never load any of the extra CIUSSS styling or any code that's necessary to power the
tabs block.
And in that way, you can streamline your website and make it super, super fast.
And so in the next section, we'll go in and check out the different starter templates that are available,
how they work, as far as bringing them into your web site.
And we'll go ahead and get started taking apart and analyzing and changing one of the starter templates
as a part of this section to learn how cadence works and how you can build amazing, unique websites
really fast once you learn the tool.